so what we're gonna do is um have a
conversation with
and what's your name dude zach zack and
then we're talking with dad
you've only met me before i noticed
i i'm actually remembering now okay um
and
zach what's your dad's name uh my dad's
name is dave my mom's just here to say
hi
okay hello mom and what's your name um
jim okay would it be inappropriate if i
winked at you
not at all
okay so what we're gonna do is um we're
gonna talk with zach
right first yes and then dave
and then y'all aren't allowed to watch
okay when we're talking with zach
and then when we're talking with dave
zach you're not allowed to watch
okay because presumption of privacy so
everyone on the internet can watch
but you all can't watch and then we're
going to talk with the two of you
together
does that sound good yep any questions
okay cool let's get started so zack
let's get started with you man so i'll
ask your parents to step out of the room
get
yeah so zach didn't we talk about um
your family dynamics when you came on
stream like back in march
a little bit not a whole lot but okay
briefly
okay yeah so tell me what's um oh
yeah there we go so tell me uh your
phd student uh dropped out
dropped out that's right so that's what
we talked about right
yeah i remember how are you doing man uh
doing okay i took your advice and went
and got a therapist and have been
talking with her for a couple months
uh i joined the group coaching
um awesome still some like
stuff mentally that i have to work out
with myself but i'm kind of making a
little bit of progress
okay great so you say you're making a
yeah so i'm starting to find that
there's a lot of
things right yeah it gets more
complicated than i thought it was
so zach the first thing i'm going to say
is that i i think
this is very common where people
i think you pro my guess or my hope is
that you've made a lot of progress but
it's hard to see that right now
if you are if you have been working with
a therapist and if you're beginning to
see
what the road ahead is then chances are
you've actually gained a lot of insight
um but you'll i mean hopefully that'll
become clear in a year or two
when you see how far you've come you
know it's sometimes hard to see like
your progress like day to day but you
look back at yourself like two or three
years ago and you'll be like wow i was
in a really bad spot and i'm like
actually okay now
that's my hope for you okay cool so tell
me a little bit about what's
um what's going on with uh your dad
or you and i'm gonna just grab my
notebook hold on
okay um so
this is it's kind of hard to like
specifically say it's with my dad right
because this is
sort of my whole family we have a
complicated stuff going on
okay so tell us about that so i'll start
with
about a week ago on like thursday or
friday my mom came into my room
like hey we need to talk about some
stuff and she just sort of like spilled
out to me
um her thoughts of how our family was
doing and i agreed
um which is that
oh man it's so complicated okay
what did you say to you
this is like a couple hour long
conversation but she was telling me that
she started with with it's difficult
with my brother
so my brother my younger brother has
autism he's like four years younger than
me
and because of kovid and other things
that has caused complications for him
and has caused him to get a little bit
more crazy than he usually is
okay and it's been getting worse and
worse and worse to the point that
uh his therapist has told my mom this
needs to be fixed soon because he's
bordering on manic
which is like pretty serious
that's very terrifying um
so there's how does it how does it feel
when
when a therapist tells you this needs to
be fixed
soon oh that's that's really bad right
like that feels it's scary it's
um anxiety inducing like
i've always known that he's got his
issues
and that we want to fix them but it's
really terrifying to hear that like
he could be put in a mental hospital if
we don't get this dealt with
okay that's just scary yeah and who's
who takes
like who who is responsible for dealing
with it
kind of my mom i mean my parents
together but i feel like a lot of the
pressure's on my mom
okay that's kind of interesting because
you know i
and i'm not blaming anyone but i kind of
think about you know
if someone is bordering on manic and
you're their provider
if you're the therapist like i don't
know exactly what the situation is and i
know a lot especially with autism has to
do with the home environment but like
generally speaking i i would think that
that's you know if i had a patient who
was bordering on manic
like i think i'm kind of responsible for
that no
is the doctor yeah it's
my personal take on this is kind of all
over the place i
think that he doesn't have the best
therapists um
okay but then so this is where i sort of
link a little bit back to
my dad's is i think
he's part of the problem okay i don't
think the only part
i think there's a lot of elements again
kobe but i think that he's part of it
because
he's a very type a personality he's
about rules
he's about um strictness and schedules
and hitting things to the letter and
autism does not fit well
into that structure and so
if you know we plan something and
we don't warn my brother adequately
enough he'll freak out about it
that's just what he does and then my dad
will get mad at him
and try to force rules on him and try to
force the structure onto him and say we
have to do this you can't follow your
patterns you have to go do this
and like
i can see kind of where he's coming from
that it's very hard to work with a child
like this
who will like half the time not care
what you say and not do what you say and
they like to fight a lot
um but as the parent it's on you
to work around that you have child
you're supposed to raise them
if they're gonna be troublesome then you
have to be accepting of that
not fight with them and yell at them and
make it worse
okay
okay so zach can i just share some
like thoughts i know i should ask you
more questions
um but the first thing is that like all
that
like i agree with you 100 but bluntly
all that [ __ ] goes out the window when
you have a kid with autism
because it's just so hard yeah and
and it's just like
yeah so so i i don't disagree with what
you say
and at the same time having worked with
parents who have
autistic kids it's tough
like they it tests yeah it i mean it's
it's just hard
i lived with him for 18 years so yeah
so you know what's it like to live with
him
uh it's been different at different
points
uh so when i was younger so like before
i left for college and everything
um it was it was really hard because
he was going through puberty and so
hormones start to mess with him
and he just gets like kind of all over
the place and like
unpredictable as heck um
i mostly just like tried to not interact
with them because it was really hard to
know when it would be a positive or when
it would be a negative interaction and
usually it was a negative interaction
um what does that mean
it would it would usually lead to
fighting
of some kind like it was really hard to
be able to relate to him in any way to
have a conversation and
again he has autism so like he doesn't
think normally and so like having a
conversation
he's just like following formulas he's
not like trying to communicate with you
um and so like it wasn't really there
wasn't really much of a point to it
and it would mostly just always devolve
to him saying something
i don't i don't even know why this has
been so many years i've lost jack what
it was like but
it would just like result in fighting of
some kind so you like rolled your eyes
there
do you know what do you know what the
emotion there is
no how'd you feel as you were
as you were thinking about what it was
like to try to communicate with your
brother
um
i don't know it was just really hard and
like can i toss out a couple of words
yeah exhausted yeah
defeated yes it's
defeated yes that's if you guys were
watching
that facial expression that's acted that
is the facial expression of defeat
it's it's and and we can kind of see
that i'm sorry back if i'm kind of
diving right in but like you know i can
i can see kind of where you're coming
from because what we're hearing from you
is that like you tried to interact with
your brother
but part of the problem with autism is
that he like literally doesn't
know how to communicate yeah
and so like you can try but like
it's just gonna kind of bounce off and
in a sense it can feel like no matter
how hard you try you end up fighting
anyway
and then you're kind of defeated yeah
so sorry for kind of going down all
these different roads but
it sounds tough dude like it sounds
actually really really hard
yeah so it was it was really hard uh at
that age i mean there was some like made
like big specific most like remember
there was one point where i don't
remember what
happened but somehow he got really angry
at me and he grabbed
one of the kitchen knives and started
chasing me around the house i was like
12 years old being chased by an
eight-year-old with the knife i was
freaking out
uh there was one time we got an argument
and he shoved me and i fell through a
glass table
and got caught up on my arms and
everything i mean
this is like there was there was crazy
things that happened
but i went to college i got away from
the family for
however many years four five six years
um
and then when i came back and i was
watching your streams and stuff i
decided to like try and interact with
him as if he's a human
rather than as if he's this disabled
person
and it went from before i was the person
that absolutely couldn't interact with
him
and he like pretty much hated me and i
pretty much hated him to where now
i'm the only person in the family who
can like pretty much talk to him
normally and he will kind of do what i
say he doesn't
care at all what my parents say anymore
so it's almost like the rules have been
reversed
hold on
so much confusion there okay so yeah
first thing
is how the [ __ ] is that a little bit of
progress
on your part
number one okay so we don't have to go
down that road but like can we just
appreciate for a moment that
also like what the [ __ ] does that have
to do with watching our streams
because i don't anyway that's another
question which we can answer on a
different day i don't know if that's
relevant
um i mean i'm happy in the mindset and
it was
and and the third thing and this is i
think what is important
is like how do you feel about that
there's some mixed emotions to that part
of it is
happiness that like i was able to
connect with him um
and and it's like it's like i was being
an [ __ ] to him before
now i'm not right like he really
struggles to communicate and i'm able to
like at least to
a small degree help him with that
so this is important zach why do you
think i'm not judging you for it because
this is important
why do you think you were an [ __ ] to
him before
where does assholery come from i was
just i was really
impatient with a lot i was like trying
to do as high school kids do and
deal with high school dumb stupid things
and i didn't
at least in my mind i didn't have the
time to deal with this
crazy child who was being a nuisance and
bothered all the time
and so i would just be very rude to him
and put off things
um i don't know i just
it's really hard to like give specific
details but in general just kind of a
day
yeah so i think that's an important
discussion also one that we don't have
to dig into today
but i think a lot of people who are are
[ __ ] kind of behavior there's some
reason like that you don't even
understand
about why you treated him that way but
something has changed in you where
you're treating him a different way
and and i don't know what that is it
sounds like that's awesome and it sounds
like he's lucky
to have a brother who is thoughtful
about the way that like you choose to
interact with him and that you make
effort to treat him not
as a disabled person but also not as
a normal human being but you treat him
as him
and and your brother is incredibly lucky
to have someone like that in their
in their life i cannot impress that upon
you enough
um but let's keep going am i jumping in
too much
uh no okay so you were mean to him so
now he communicates only with you
you have happiness because you used to
be an [ __ ] to him and
what other emotions do you have um
i also feel a little bit upset because
yeah i feel a little bit upset about
like how
my parents can't do the same thing at
least not right now
okay so let's unpack that a little bit
what does upset mean
frustrated uh angry
angry at what
those are all umbrella emotions which
means they're hiding other emotions
i'm disappointed i guess there we go
disappointed in what
that i'm some stupid kid
he was able to come to this realization
that i was making mistakes and i was
able to adjust that and fix that
and that happens despite the fact that
they're supposed to be like
the knowledgeable parents there we go
there's a key word there they're
supposed to
okay i'm a stupid kid okay zach there's
a ton there can we analyze as we go
or do you want like you want me to hear
your story first
um think about that
i guess i'm kind of curious how we'll be
able to get through everything if we're
analyzing along
that's that's the concern so
then let's just okay i'm gonna do one
more
analytical piece and then we'll get
through everything okay so the first
thing is that
your disappointment so i think you blame
your parents what do you think
yeah right so there's disappointment and
that also is like a little bit more
politically correct than blame
but what i'm hearing from you is that
you blame your parents for
not figuring out what you figured out
so there's there's something also there
where you say i'm a stupid kid
i don't think you're a stupid kid i
think you grossly underestimate
the value of what you've accomplished
because some autistic people go their
entire life
without having someone in their life who
does what you did
because what you did is not easy it's
[ __ ] hard
um and
yeah and i think that you have to be
careful because
as long as you see what you do is easy
you're going to resent your parents more
okay what do you think about that
that's interesting because you were
saying that it's really hard and i was
thinking to myself
it doesn't feel that hard it feels
pretty easy but if you when you
reframe it that way that's interesting
yep so we can continue thinking about
that and and i would just really ask you
to
i know it feels easy to you but
just stop and think for a second about
how easy it is to
effectively communicate with an autistic
adult
yeah right
so so don't confuse you being really
good at something
with the fact that it's easy okay
um but we'll we'll get to that anyway i
promise i'll shut up now and and
i'll hear the rest of your story uh okay
so you feel blame
you feel happiness what else
um those are kind of the main things i
would think
i i also kind of feel bad for him right
because
i almost imagine having autism i don't
know i mean we don't know a whole lot
about it right so it's difficult to
say but i must imagine as you are a
normal person trapped
in this strange mind that you can't
control
um and so he's trying to find
outlets and trying to help himself in
that way i think
yeah i don't really know but i think um
and he's just trying to i mean he's just
trying to be normal right
she wants to experience what other
people experience and
i mean for one it's really it's
frustrating to not be able to do that
because of your own limitations but i
also feel it's very frustrating to not
be able to do that because of other
people around you not understanding
like one of the things that i hate the
most is when someone misunderstands me
and to have that
always happening constantly like that'd
be awful
yeah so you feel kind of sad for him
yeah um
do you feel burdened at all that like
you kind of become
the last best hope
for him i don't know
i mean a little bit because i'm actually
planning to
go to leave once covet goes down i want
to like move to japan
and so i'll be like see ya okay right
like i feel a little bad about it but
i don't know i i also kind of don't
really
feel that burdened by it it's just like
i'm being here for him while i can be
and hopefully i can get my parents to
realize the same thing
and then realize what well sir like
realize the same things that i have
about okay about how to enter yeah how
to interact with them i guess
how do your parents feel about you
peacing out after
i haven't told them okay because i came
to this realization like a week or two
ago
and it's so sort of like a plan in my
head that i haven't really
like done anything about yet but the
more and more i sit on it the more and
more i'm like
set on it and i really want to do it so
okay
sounds like you've made a lot of
progress man i know right
i i feel like now i was exaggerating
when i said a little but
yep so that has something to do with
your your perception of your own
confidence but
oh yeah yes when i was saying earlier
about there's a lot of things that you'd
focus on so that's sort of what i mean
okay so now we sort of get your
perspective so what's going on in the
family
or what was the conversation when
yeah so fill me in a little bit about
the conversation that you and your mom
had
tell me about your dad or tell me about
the therapist
saying he's bordering on manic whichever
one you think is better
um i just can try and continue this
conversation i can remember
a lot of the conversation was her
explaining to me
her perspective on a situation that had
happened earlier
so we had some my parents had hired
window cleaners to come to our house and
clean the windows
um my they were
burdened with whatever was going on they
were thinking about some crazy stuff so
they didn't get to tell me or my brother
until the night before that hey the
window
actually they told me but they didn't
tell my brother i think
and so i had i knew that i was gonna
wake up in the morning and there's gonna
be windows cleaners there
there could be some crazy stuff going on
in the house my brother didn't
um and so i'm sleeping in until like 11
or whatever as i usually do
the window cleaners are here my mom was
telling me that
my dad since he's about like timing and
rules and all this stuff starting to get
anxious because we need to move stuff
away from the windows
so that they could clean it okay just
being nice to them
they were going to probably move things
anyways but he wanted to make sure that
everything was out of the way for them
so he was getting anxious about that
and he was putting that anxiety on her
because she tends to be receptive to
other people's feelings and he tends to
put his feelings on to other people
okay um and so she was getting anxiety
from him
so she came into my room to wake me up
to move some stuff around to get me to
help
and then she went to tell my brother who
didn't know and
as an autistic person that's gonna upset
him and so she started moving things in
his room he started freaking out and
then he started to mount them
which eventually later in the day
resulted him screaming [ __ ] you to the
painters and my parents were worried
that he was actually going to go out and
push one of them off the ladder or
something
because like he was going crazy um
and in all of this my dad was again
trying to enforce rules on him so we
have this
screaming 20 year old 300 pound guy who
has autism
you have my dad's trying to say you
can't do that
you just need to calm down and let them
clean your windows you have
my mom in the middle like freaking out
not knowing to do trying to get everyone
to calm down and then you have me
downstairs in the basement playing video
games trying to shout out all the noise
uh and so she was conveying all this to
me from her perspective
um and that was like a lot of what she
was talking about and then she
started laying more of her other stuff
problems on about how like her parents
were coming over
the next day um and her parents are
alcoholics and she struggles with that
and then we
sounds like she depends on you for a lot
i i don't know because this was like
she doesn't usually talk to me about
these kind of things i see
yeah she this was like the first time
that i had had any sort of conversation
like this with her and
since i had depression like she came out
to visit me while i was in utah and that
was the last time we had a conversation
like this
so actually then then i would i mean do
you think she
hm okay so that's not a regular
occurrence so it sounds like she doesn't
depend on you much
i don't think she does well i mean it's
kind of weird right because
we talk to each other very familiarly
familiarly and we will have
conversations where we try not to like
let my dad or my brother over here
i don't have those kind of conversations
with my dad or my brother i only have
those conversations with my mom
just like the very close interpersonal
stuff
so like what makes her
to a degree i think she kind of does
depend on me for that connection but i
wouldn't say that she
don't like spilling everything sure it's
really so it sounds like you guys are
just
like just close family yeah yeah
um and and what makes it hard for you to
have those kinds of conversations with
your dad
he is like virtually impossible to talk
to about any of that
because again type like very hyper type
a personality
he's an engineer to his core
um so feelings do not compute
right okay um and
part of what came up in like this
conversation my mom is she was talking
about how
he's sort of always been this way he was
raised this way
i don't know i actually know very little
about him or what happened in his
childhood but the way that she conveyed
to me is
that his family was like this they
weren't very connected to each other
um it was the difficult households and
then
i mean once he hit college he joined
rotc so he was military for like 30
years which again instills this like you
follow the rules of the leader
you don't disobey who's in command and
now he's in command
and so he's very much in this way of
yeah would you say that your dad is
oppressive
in ways yeah it's that's it's really
hard to say because it's very
complicated right but
sure i'm just asking if that's how it
feels
what i'm basically getting is not really
yes and no again it's i it's hard to say
how it feels
because on i guess i'll give you an
example so
last night i was scrolling through
discord and saw
somebody type the command for when does
the live stream go up
and it was midnight and i saw 11 hours
and i thought i thought it was at one
o'clock
and then i realized no i got the time
conversion wrong it was at 11 o'clock
and so i had to go
into my parents room to tell them as
they were trying to go to sleep
that i messed it up and it was actually
at the wrong time
and i felt anxious about having to
explain that to my dad
i felt like he was either going to be
upset or he was going to try to cancel
or something like that
not at all what happened he took it
totally fine and everything was okay but
i felt like that
so if that helps communicate to you how
i feel around him
in any way it it i mean that scenario
sounds to me
like it's almost like the same way that
you interact with your brother which is
like
like you you've learned the lesson that
telling your dad that things are
changing
leads to madness
yeah so i think oppressive isn't the
right word i mean it sounds like
it sounds like you're playing with fire
sorry what
it's not it feels to me like you're
playing with fire
you know like you don't know when it's
gonna blow
the way my mom has described it is like
walking on eggshells
your dad gets angry yes
what do what does he do when he gets
angry
uh he does this like very cold
not talk to anybody um he has this like
angry look at his face as he just like
does whatever he does and he's usually
like kind of so aggressive with it so
like if he's
eating food he'll like aggressively cut
with the knife or whatever
um and then if anybody like talks too
loudly
or addresses him incorrectly then he'll
like
instead of responding i don't know in a
nice way he responds in an angry way
whether that's like
very agitated or yelling or anything
like that when he
yeah what's it like to live with someone
like that
yeah it's really hard dude um
for a while there was it was like every
other day when we would eat dinner my
brother would say something or have a
pattern or something my dad would get
mad at him he would get mad at my dad
and then they would yell at each other
and i'm just trying to sit there and eat
food like
zach do you think of yourself as
resilient
no okay
i understand that that makes perfect
sense to me
and yet i'm gonna ask you
how would you describe someone who sits
there and tries to eat their food
is on a daily basis two members of their
family are constantly exploding
at each other
it probably is resilient right it's
weird
it's [ __ ] weird
and okay
yeah that sounds that sounds like i mean
really hard is like the understatement
of the year
honestly it feels to me i would feel
like i it would be impossible
for me to do what you do
like it feels impossible to me
yeah i mean it's kind of hard because i
don't know what
to do right like if i don't like okay
if i don't want to do it if i don't want
to be resilient what do i do like
i don't have any option because i kind
of have to deal with it yeah
but yeah i can kind of see where you're
coming from yeah i like i don't know
what you
like it sounds it sounds like an
impossible situation
feels like an impossible situation yeah
what do you do about that i have no
[ __ ] idea sit downstairs and play
video games that's fun
right on that's the right answer
um yeah man
by the way the examples that you offer
are really really helpful
really okay good yeah i think i think
they capture
a lot you know you're like painting a
picture
and like sort of a picture's worth a
thousand words so a lot of these
dynamics i think are very helpful
um do you feel like you've given us kind
of like a sufficient picture
are there other things that you want to
add i
there's nothing that i can like
specifically add i don't think it
really encompasses everything but it
would be really hard to because it's a
whole lot of you know
more examples of similar situations that
i just can't remember
or like small things here and there that
again are just like
it's it's too difficult to like really
explain the whole the whole of it but
that's about as good of a picture as i
can give
okay um can i
try to sum up what i heard and then
maybe we can fill in gaps okay sure um
and then maybe we can talk about your
dad a little bit more but
okay so your parents have two sons
you're the older son you're
i understand that you don't view
yourself as very competent
but we know that there's con there's
evidence to the contrary let's put it
that way
right so like you were in a pretty
competitive phd program
you ended up dropping out slash getting
kicked out
at a toxic advisor things like that you
thought that your toxic advisor and for
people who
i guess i'm surprised i remember but you
know you thought
that everything that your advisor was
doing to you
i think towards the end you really
realize that it's not really your fault
that your advisor was actually pretty
bad
but i can imagine that that would be a
pretty severe blow to your confidence
so you kind of come home you have a
younger brother who's autistic
um it sounds like early on maybe things
were sort of okay
but then as he start started to grow and
you started to grow it became very very
difficult to interact with him
um it sounds to me like your parents
sort of did the best that they could but
when your dad kind of is in crisis mode
he goes back to what he knows
which is control structure right when
there's a problem like you you rely on
systems
resources and rules to kind of deal with
it
there's not a whole lot of fluidity so
it also sounds like he gets
anxious actually pretty easily
and the way that he responds to his own
anxiety is control
so when he gets anxious he tries to
control [ __ ] yes
and it sounds like he also
recruits your mom to be one of his tools
to leverage control
in the household yes and because
she is somewhat conflict avoidant
she kind of gives in
because she's walking on eggshells and
doesn't want to you know doesn't want to
step on any eggs and
want to end up with yolk on the floor so
everyone sort of listens to your dad
because he kind of like he sort of runs
the show is pretty controlling if you
don't listen to
your dad maybe there's not a whole lot
of like dialogue there's not a whole lot
of like opinions or like
hey dad they can move the stuff
themselves like he's not really in the
space to sort of hear that kind of thing
yeah um and then we kind of come to your
so it sounds like you and your mom are
close
right so you guys can connect with each
other because both y'all are sort of
like
talkers or feelers and it
it it seems like your dad and your
brother have difficulty engaging
on that wavelength yeah so i'm not
really detecting
any amount of kind of like reverse
parenting
so sometimes we get into situations
where parents
become the children and children become
the parents
yeah that's i'm not getting any of that
so it doesn't sound like your mom
leans on you for her emotional needs it
sounds like you guys like you're an
adult and she's an adult
and you all are close family members you
all understand each other you all love
each other and you all just have a
strong relationship
where there's pretty even flow of
communication yeah
um then we come to your brother so your
brother is autistic
it's unclear to me exactly where he is
in terms of function but it sounds like
he's like kind of functional but
has a lot of difficulty managing his own
emotions
and and can kind of be okay if he's got
a routine
but i'm not hearing that he's like
non-verbal
or or things like that that like you
know his emotions escalate
pretty easily he doesn't respond well to
routine but you can communicate with him
he does to a certain degree appreciate
communication
yeah i mean we used to joke because the
when
he was first diagnosed they said that he
would be non-verbal and now we joke that
he's overly verbal
yeah that's great i mean that's actually
a huge
that's a huge win whether y'all realize
it or not which i think it's hard for
you guys to realize but um
you know having a autistic kid who
becomes verbal
is like really amazing
and it's a testament to what your family
has accomplished which it may not seem
like that right now but
you know i've seen other cases where
non-verbal kids end up non-verbal
and that also doesn't mean that their
families didn't try hard enough which is
what's really hard about autism
but i think you guys really deserve a
pat on the back for
um you know what y'all have done for him
so then the other thing that i'm going
to kind of hypothesize a little bit is
is you know it sounds like your
brother's autism
and your dad's desire for control are
sort of like
oil and water like that just sounds bad
yeah
i i sort of liken it to
two autistic people with very different
patterns trying to mesh those patterns
together
like that just will not happen at all so
tell me a little bit about
you know how they don't measure why they
don't mesh and i'm guessing
i can phrase the question slightly
differently what's the cycle
because it sounds like there's a cycle
in there but
tell me about their interactions so my
brother has
like eight billion different little
patterns he goes through on a regular
basis
um and my dad will come up with
something
whether it's dinner time or we'd go
somewhere or there's work that needs to
be done
or someone's coming to fix the house in
some way whatever something needs to
happen
and then that does not agree with the
pattern of my brother
so like often what happens is my dad
will get frustrated that it's dinner
time but my brother has to go walk the
dog right now because that's his pattern
and so there's conflict there um
and so my dad will say like well why
didn't you do it earlier or why don't
you do
after and my brother would say because i
want to do it now
and then my dad will um either roll his
eyes and go
and then be like whatever or he'll fight
with him
um and he'll say like no you have to do
x now you need to do it now
this needs to happen and then my brother
will yell and scream and then start
fighting and then
at that point communication breaks down
and it's just and
arguing people not even like aiming at
each other it's just like
craziness yeah so the cycle is like
the my brother is always in his constant
state of like existing in his patterns
and if my dad has something that
needs to happen they both have this
thing that needs to happen but they
can't happen together like they just
can't
coexist and so then disagreement comes
from there okay
and so so is would it be fair for me to
assume that the more
conflict arises the more your dad
doubles down on control
and the more he doubles down on control
the more conflict arises
yes do so if your dad your dad sometimes
gives up and accepts defeat
does your brother do that does your dad
ever win no no he doesn't
okay
okay so i mean do you feel like we have
a pretty good picture
of what these dynamics are like yeah uh
when you were laying it out it was
i felt like it was better than the way i
tried to lay it out like you really hit
the nail
no buddy you laid it out i'm just
telling you what i heard
okay um i think you like i said you gave
a lot of very very
illustrated illustrative actual examples
that captured a lot of that essence
very well um so
what helped me understand a little bit
about like you know why are
we here today so like what's what's the
goal of like having you and your dad
come on
because i'm not hearing any
communication issues between you and
your dad
yeah uh i'm not fully sure uh
to be honest because okay so my mom came
in and had this conversation with me
that's when i
remembered that you guys were looking
for families to come on and that's when
i
messaged french hey i got a family that
needs to come on
okay and after going back and forth he
said that you wanted to have
only like two people come on to more
direct
let's have you and your dad tomorrow's
like all right cool
okay um so
so what do you what what do you what
would you like to change about your
family dynamic
oh that's a good question ah
i mean there's a couple things for one i
would like
my parents to have a better
understanding of
my brother and be
how do i put this
i want them to be less likely to
conflict with him right like i this
whole thing with my dad dumbling down of
control and him getting more angry and
my dad doubling down again and then him
getting more angry like
that's obvious to me i want that to be
obvious to him
so that he doesn't do that anymore a's
for me
because i can't have constant yelling in
my life
b for my mom because she also needs
peace
c for my brother so that he doesn't have
this conflict and d for my dad because
i mean like i said my dad was raised in
this very like rules way and i don't
think that's good for him
or for anybody in the family okay
um and i think that's actually i think
that'd be such a
to somehow find a way to slowly break
him out of that because that would solve
so many different things
breaking bad this this
uh rules-based very strict style that he
has always been
okay so what we want to do is change him
as a human being
well yeah like no no but hey i asked you
i asked you what do you want to change
that's cool
because it's real like i have
no connection with my dad whatsoever i
don't know if i've ever really like
wanted one because i
have never really like experienced that
in any way we just have never connected
with each other really hardly at all
um whereas i have been able to connect
and
be pretty friendly with my mom and i
like that connection so if there were
some way to have that with my dad i
don't know if that's practical or
possible or if that's even something
that i really want but
okay um has your dad ever seen a
therapist
no nope he has always looked at it his
psychological mumbo-jumbo ignored that
crap
it was hard to get him into this
well hey so like strong work with
getting him here right like that's
that's
he deserves he deserves some props for
showing up
yeah oh i forgot to mention when i was
talking to my mom in here
um she had mentioned to me that she
brought up family counseling with my dad
and it was the first time that he had
agreed that this is maybe
something we should do so he's like kind
of starting to go a little bit in that
direction
okay any questions for me zach
i don't know i don't have anything come
to mind right now i mean i feel like we
got to talk to your dad bro
yeah like i think you've laid out a
pretty good picture
uh thankfully since we've talked before
i know a little bit about you
oh are we lagging okay um but i think a
lot of this has to come
from your dad's perspective and then
we'll get both you all in together does
that sound good to you
yeah let's swap and no watching okay
okay let me find them
all right
all right twitch how you guys is this
sound like a good use of our time
on stream
okay
hey dr gay hey dave how are you good are
you
uh i'm doing well man um how do you feel
about doing this
um i've never done it before uh
a little uncomfortable just a little
okay quite a bit i can imagine right
let's
let's just call it what it is you know
yeah i won't hide it yeah
um you know i've i've had experiences
and standing up and briefing
uh small and large groups of people
so it's kind of in the same realm i
haven't done that for a long time
but it's one of those things uh the more
you do it
the more you become comfortable with it
particularly if you fully understand the
subject
matter and here i don't because i don't
know where you're coming from
sure so so maybe i can help you there
would you like
to hear where i'm coming from sure okay
so i'm gonna kind of zoom
out a little bit okay and tell you a
little bit about what we do here
so i'm uh we tend to just talk to people
on the internet because it's been my
experience that like
people share a lot of the same
challenges in life
and that by talking to one person like i
basically have the same conversations
with a lot of different people
and so what we do here is we have
conversations with people that other
people watch
because i can imagine that you have
or y'all's family has some amount of
conflict
or maybe some kind of difficulty
communication in communicating
and that is also true of every other
family in the history of human existence
and so the reason that we're here today
is to see if that there's something we
can help
you guys do to maybe communicate a
little bit better
maybe to be to understand each other a
um understand how the the dynamics of
the family unit
works right so like it's a big i have a
big belief that
in order to change something you have to
understand how it works
so what we're really here to do today is
to try to understand a little bit about
what's going
on um in you in your family
and in the interface between those two
things
how does that sound good sounds good so
can you tell me a little bit about
um so zach had mentioned that there's
been like you know tensions have been
running high in the house
recently um would you agree with that
yes can you help me understand a little
bit about what your perception of that
is
um part of it i'll say there's been a
change in the family dynamics
in the recent months partially due
to covid absolutely in the fact that
um in a normal day pre-coveted
i was at work my wife works from home
and our son was in school
and he would normally get home about 2
30.
since covid um
i'm working from home for the past four
months
uh our other child
the one that zach had mentioned was
autistic
uh he's home now full-time and
and zach's been home full-time so
everybody's home 24-7
and it's been a drastic change for the
autistic
son and that his normal
daily routine has been disturbed
and he's trying to find himself with new
routines
and he really he's he's a little unique
autistic kid in the way that he is
social
where most are not social and he misses
that social interaction that he gets
riding the bus
and with his teachers and peers in his
school he's in a
transition program he graduated from
high school but they hold the diploma
until he completes a two-year transition
program to help set him up
for employment or some other opportunity
okay so offers that and it's a real good
program so he will come to uh
to the end of that program here in
december but any case
his normal routine and social
interaction
is has not been happening the last four
months
and so that's caused a drastic behavior
change in him
okay that's added added stress yeah so i
was just going to say that sounds like a
pretty hefty stressor
on the system of your family yes
how does that stress manifest
uh with the
the autistic center his name is carson
he uh
has become had more meltdowns become
more
difficult to manage his behavior
he's very obsessed with patterns
and if he can't do his patterns the way
he wants to
for various reasons whether the weather
interferes with him going outside and
walking the dog
or some other
interference as a result of family
activities perhaps
he'll have a meltdown and that disturbs
the family
it can evolve into shouting
and yelling and it takes us 30 to 40
minutes to calm him down
to where he can reason through the
situation at hand
okay so tell me what a meltdown you kind
of mention this a little bit
when you say he has more meltdowns like
tell us tell me or
us what a meltdown looks like it becomes
uh
uncontrollable verbally and emotionally
he'll start yelling he
will make statements that are
unclear and don't make any sense and
he can become very physical
and um he is 6'3 240
so he's bigger than mom and dad so that
becomes a
turn and so the key here is
de-escalation
and to talk him down and to get him calm
that you can reason through the
situation
and um it can be very very challenging
and draining
for both mom and dad and and obviously
zach as well too
how do you de-escalate him
talking continually
talking and talk him down
help me understand what that looked like
um patience we have to stay
calm even though we may be exhausted and
stressed
sounds like it's an exhausting situation
it is mentally
and it can't be physically because uh
this can happen late at night
you know when we're ready to go to bed
he can have a meltdown 11 30 at night
and it'll take us
you know an hour and a half to get him
situated and ready for bed for example
and um it's it's uh
being patient and us remaining calm
and talking him down in
from the situation and trying to reason
through it what are the words that you
use
to talk him down or reason through the
situation can you give us an example
one is breathing get him
to take deep breaths and try to calm
himself down
physically and hopefully and then
eventually
mentally as well so he can think
rationally and uh you know the
adrenaline kicks in
and um he can get spun up
physically in in mentally pretty rapid
and what do you say
is that we have uh you know he has
counselors and therapists
it we're uh wanting to get family
training to know how to work with him
and
understand what his triggers are that
sounds like a great idea
um so what what do you say when when he
gets wound up
whatever the situation is
is is to talk through that situation
and very elementary terms
and let him try to understand there's
not any consequence
in not doing one of his patterns
and for example it may be
he has patterns that he does during the
day and it delays him to take the dog
out for a walk that's one of his
uh things he loves to do it's one of his
patterns
and if the weather rolls in and it
starts raining
then he's in conflict that he can't do
his pattern he
he wants to do it but he can't because
it's raining and so he's in a do loop
and he can't get out of it and so we try
to come up with alternatives to say
let's wait till the rain passes or two
tomorrow knowing that a storm is coming
in the afternoon let's change your
pattern and walk the dog in the morning
and so we try to reason through
alternatives
to permit him to complete his pattern
okay okay and
and how does it how do you manage
all of this stress or
yeah how how do you manage that i mean
it sounds
so sort of deep i mean just
sure decompress but also like how do you
manage things in the moment
you know how do you feel when it's 11 30
at night
and
that that scenario is very difficult at
night because uh
i i get it you know about nine o'clock
i'm starting to get tired
and if we're watching something on tv
and uh
he starts to have a meltdown you know 10
11 o'clock at night
um you have to regain your composure
in uh what does that mean regain your
composure what is
what is losing computer look and feel
regaining
it should say regain some strength you
get some endurance that you may be out
of gas
by the end of the day but need to
[Music]
dig deep and and get the strength
to get you through the period it takes
to get
to calm him down from from a potential
meltdown
okay what happens if you dig deep and
there's nothing there
nothing left then
at some point i've lost it
as well as my wife and there's you know
there's a threshold that we all have
absolutely and we've learned that
uh both parents or one parent
and and and carson um
shouting and yelling and and getting
into an escalation
is of no value to anybody we've learned
that so
again the key is is you gotta gain
composure get your mind together and
realize we got to de-escalate
and think through quickly how you can
provide alternatives and rationalize
with them to calm them down
can i think for a second dave sure
it's gonna take me a minute okay sure
i'm just gonna i'm trying to process
everything that you've said really kind
of pay attention to it
really try to understand you know the
inputs that you're offering us
and integrating it a little bit with
some of what your son has said
so the first thing that i want to point
out is that a lot of what you're saying
like you use a lot of like language of
necessity
so you say you gotta you need to you
have to
you gotta dig deep you gotta find
strength
does that make sense
yeah and
and i know this may sound kind of weird
but like
what needs to be done is like quite
different from
how it feels in the moment right it's
sort of like looking forward
does that make sense the end state
yes so you're focusing on the end state
you're focusing on the goal
right do you think there's value
to focusing on things besides the goal
like how you feel in the moment
sure what's the value in that
short-term results what does that mean
small steps to get to your goal take one
step at a time
and it could be calm yourself down first
before you can help someone else okay so
it seems like the value
of like your emotions understanding your
emotions
is so that you can master them so that
you can get to your end goal
yes so the only value that i'm really
hearing from you about
understanding let's say the way that you
feel in the moment
is because that's going to help you get
to your end goal is that fair
yeah okay
so i don't know how exactly to explain
this so i'm going to
think about it for a little while and
i'm going to ask you some more questions
but in my experience there's value to
knowing what you feel
independent of it getting you to your
goal
what do you think about that
yeah that
how you feeling what how you feel in the
moment is important
and that can
influence i guess the outcome sure
your goal so
so what i'm wondering is is there
importance if it doesn't influence your
outcome
no no i haven't thought about that
what do you think
so explain that a little bit more so let
me think about that
let me just try to come up with an
example
so i'm going to use a slightly dire
so and and maybe there's i'm sure
there's an outcome somewhere here so
let's say that i have someone who
has cancer and that the cancer is
terminal
like understanding that the cancer is
terminal changes nothing about the fact
that the person is going to die
and yet just understanding that you have
terminal cancer can change something
within you
like it has value
right and so you could say that there's
an outcome there too which is that you
spend your the rest of your life in a
slightly different way
so i'm sort of always seeing an outcome
but oddly enough
as someone who's worked with terminal
cancer patients
i've observed that even if it doesn't
change something about their life or it
doesn't lead to a goal
that understanding how you feel and
understanding what the situation is
in and of itself has value
does that make sense yes here you go
so another example is like when i think
about a flower
like and i look at a flower and i think
oh that flower is beautiful
there's no goal there
there's no like there's no outcome
and understanding that i appreciate
flowers and like just watching a flower
and appreciating it for what it is
can have value but there's not really a
goal does that make sense
yeah as you're saying and so
when you say you see what i'm saying
what what do you think i'm saying
what do you see because i i don't even
know what i'm saying
so help us out not everything has to
contribute to a goal
and you can enjoy the moment for
whatever value it provides you
okay if it's entertainment
fulfillment happiness
sure so uh so that's that's a really um
great way to put it dave so let me ask
you actually another question
it sounds like appreciating the moment
without a goal
is important if it has a positive
direction
so happiness joy beauty
what about negative things
i guess just be undesirable unless
unless there is some value in it i can't
think of an example now where
okay a negative negative uh outcome in
the in a moment
like that would have value except that
if it was negative
maybe you learn from it sure yeah okay
the learning experience
yeah so um
the best thing that i can kind of think
of is in terms of a negative thing is
like what i think of is like the
grieving process right so like grieving
is sort of this weird thing where sure
you can also see outcomes because after
grieving you're not maybe
less sad or no longer sad or something
like that but i i think that there's
just
value in people like grieving together
and just acknowledging that there's been
some kind of loss
and sure that leads to like peace down
the road so you could say that's an
outcome
but sitting with grief i think sometimes
is not always a bad thing
what do you think i agree grieving is
part of the healing process
okay how are you feeling right now by
the way
a little more comfortable than when it
started okay or do you feel like we're
walking on shaky ice
no um i'm
struggling for the words to try to
articulate our son's behavior
uh in in answering your question on how
we de-escalate
and it's it's kind of one of those
things it's a little difficult
to describe but
um it's it's a tactic or technique
in trying to de-escalate and it's a
little difficult to describe
and it is and it depends on the
situation at hand because
his meltdowns quite often aren't
consistent they're they're different
things that would uh
bring on a meltdown sometimes they're
unpredictable
sometimes we can predict them okay
um okay that makes sense because it it
sounds like
you know you're doing a lot of stuff up
here you're making a lot of calculations
and that's like a pretty complex
equation and then like
words come out of your mouth but it's
hard to really explain to us
how that process works right
that makes a lot of sense i mean i can
imagine it would be hard to to explain
it you know to amplify on that our
friends
and family who see him occasionally
think he's the sweetest kid but they
don't
know what he's like at home
so how does that feel
for them to see him as the sweetest kid
but not know what he's like at home
it's it's difficult because they
they don't understand how he could
behave and have meltdowns
like we described and
until they witness it themselves
what's difficult about that
some people don't believe us
so what is it like to be not believed by
some people
what is it like to have them not
understand
um it is difficult to relate
okay so
i think dave that there's an emotion
there
difficult to relate is what we see on
the outside
right that's a result like it's hard for
these two people to relate
how do do you have a sense of if there's
like an emotion that you feel
when other people don't understand what
you're saying
no it's just um
it's just one of those things you can
try to articulate it and ex
and describe what a meltdown is what
causes it
but until they they witness it firsthand
i don't think they they have a full
understanding of it right so what's it
like for you
to talk to someone who doesn't have a
full understanding and sort of like
thinks that he's just this
happy-go-lucky kid
it it's um
it doesn't bother me or it isn't um
any in difficult at all it's just you
try to articulate it and if they don't
understand or comprehend it that's okay
it doesn't affect me at all
sure but
they don't know what our life is really
like
at home so what do you think it's like
for a human being
to interact with other human beings who
don't know
what their life is like
uh misunderstanding don't understand
what makes him tick so i'm going to toss
out a word which is what i'm digging for
okay but i think that this is a
vocabulary that
that you may be unfamiliar with we're
playing with a system
that you may be kind of unfamiliar with
so when i
when i hear that what i imagine you may
be feeling on some level
is actually kind of like isolated
when i think about human connection i
think about people who can relate to
each other
and relationships are based on like
shared experiences
and when i think about someone who
doesn't share like who has an experience
of child
rearing and and has a sun that other
people haven't seen what that sun is
like
i can imagine that it's difficult for
you all to have
a shared experience of what it's like
what what carson is like
and when i think about a lack of shared
experience then i think about isolation
because shared is experience is what
connects us
what do you think yeah i see what you're
saying
um i guess to expand on that is you're
right uh we we don't have a common
experience with other
family friends in in that relationship
of a child
with special needs um
but yet on the other hand those family
friends that we do have
we do have a lot of other things in
common sure
and uh socialize together of course
uh weekend ski trips together for
example in which carson participates
but on that one realm of
special needs here or a child behavior
they can't fully relate to it
and how do you feel if they
do understand if they see it
it's a good feeling that there is a
common understanding
and they can appreciate what we go
through
yeah what is that feeling
well satisfying comforting
yeah i see you smiling a little bit
yeah do you know what you're feeling
right now like as we started talking
about it i noticed that that feeling
almost came up for you
yes it's trying to get to uh describing
where where you're leading me to trying
to help find the words to
describe it yeah what so what what are
you feeling
do you know it's the
understanding and the relationship
between people
yeah so can i toss out a word
connect it right you feel connected
and how how does it feel like because
like that feels good right so
so what what i'm hearing from you it's
strange right because you would
think for a moment let's be
non-judgmental okay dave so you would
think for a moment that
your family friends seeing one of
carson's meltdowns would be like a bad
thing
on paper it looks like a bad thing and
in a sense it is a bad thing
but i think there's something really
important here which is that
i get the sense that you and your family
are sort of like
fighting this like very isolated war
and every day is a struggle and and
carson's fighting with you guys too like
i don't think he's the enemy i think
he's on your team
and what you guys are fighting against
is carson's autism
and covet and and i think your brother
i mean your son put it beautifully that
he kind of thinks about carson as a
normal person
who's trapped in an autistic mind
what do you think about that i agree
and and sometimes it can feel
very very tiring and exhausting and
stressful
to fight what i imagine may sometimes
feel like you to be an
endless battle like do you think this is
a battle that you got a war that you
guys win
no i i don't look at it in that realm
it is something we have to learn
about him because we can't fix him
yet we have to
understand him and connect with him
and the way his mind processes
and how he deals
with his frustrations and challenges
and communications with us and it's a
daily
daily challenge and a daily lesson
learned
and it's it's trying
but that's the way my wife and i are is
we face challenges and we i see that on
and keep keep chugging away day at a
time
yeah you know he uh zach mentioned
something else to me was that which is
that carson
um when he was first diagnosed with
autism
you guys had been sort of given the
diagnosis that he's going to be
non-verbal
right and that he's apparently
overly verbal now which which i think is
actually like a huge testament to the
attitude that you and your wife take
which is that you know you face
challenges head on and and i'm telling
you i've seen
non-verbally diagnosed autistic people
who end up
non-verbal and i've also seen
families who do heroic things and and
defy all the odds and i've also seen
families who do heroic things and the
odds don't get divided
right we've been fortunate and
i do give credit to my wife because she
and
has endured it more than me because i've
been at work you know 18 hours a day and
she's been home
raising him but
we have treated him like a normal kid
with no disability
and inclusion is very important and i
think
because of that we we've had the
successes we've had
yeah how do you feel talking about this
stuff
it's it's great to talk about it it's a
great feeling uh
the um
even though we have the daily challenges
we have to reflect back on the progress
that we've made and how far he's come
and that for example like you mentioned
he's non-verbal and he's using sign
language we
taught sign language to him when he was
three years old
and uh wow cherry is now
fully verbal he's graduated from high
school
and um we've made great progress
he plays the piano he's a awesome skier
he's on
we're a coach in special olympics and so
he's made
great progress physically emotionally
and
intellectually as well but a lot of
credit goes to my wife
because she helped him get through high
school by tutoring at home
and building study sheets for him on the
very subject matters that he was taken
in high school
and uh it's it's been a team effort
a lot of investment and
we're reaping some of those rewards but
we still have a long ways to go though
independence independence is where we're
we're striving for that he can live on
his own
and hold uh hold down a job and um
be able to interact socially yeah we got
a ways to go
but that has come at a sacrifice too
with uh i think with what have you
sacrificed uh i think with zach it's
it sacrificed time with him because of
the interruptions and disturbances
uh due to carson's behavior and and uh
the challenges with him
uh and certainly other sacrifices you
know in the family as well
but um you know we're dealt our deck of
cards and we play our hand
and uh except we look back and look at
the great progress he's made
but it's been a lot of work getting
there
not complaining would it be okay if you
did
i think it'd be selfish you know um
this is our family what's selfish about
complaining
well complaining that my life pity on me
because of my family life with an
autistic son
but uh there's other great rewards that
others don't
don't experience and that's seeing a
child
that's disabled grow and become mature
and striving towards independence and
seeing the progress there's great
rewards and satisfaction in that
okay so dave i'm gonna toss something
out for you to think about okay
i understand where you're coming from in
terms of
not complaining and you know not
throwing yourself a pity party
and at the same time i think we're
running up against
some lost value and there's a difference
between
accepting that you have some negative
emotion
and throwing yourself a pity party
as bizarre as the sounds i think that
you
[Music]
are entitled if you feel like it to
complain
what do you think about that
i can understand that and i'll be honest
my wife and i
have complained to each other good and
it's good and healthy to talk about that
and
myself i'm more independent
prefer to do my own problem solving
and resolve things myself
and not have to rely on others where did
you find that
good question i don't know if i think
it's just i'm wired that way
how do people get wired dna
genetics probably from my parents
can you tell us my wife and i again
we're kind of
wired in the same fashion is we hunker
down and get her done
and uh yeah we can um
talk about it ourselves console each
other
and and if you want to say complain
but yet we look back and we see uh
how grateful we are in the gratitude and
how rewarding has been working with our
son but yet it's been very difficult at
the same time
yeah i think that complain is a tricky
word because it implies
i can't imagine complaining and
gratitude coexisting
but the way that you're kind of talking
about it i i do think that there's been
sorrow and joy triumph and failure
you know when i really hear about it i
think that there's been negative and
positive
um and i i do i would encourage you to
you know i'm actually happy that you you
complained to your wife i think that's
healthy for you i think it's healthy to
acknowledge that
things are hard for us sometimes and it
doesn't make us weak
what do you think yeah i agree it's
healthy
it's uh it's been consoling
it's therapeutic
even talking with friends we've we've
talked with friends before too that did
do understand carson and
they sympathize with this encourage us
and then they're also
very very encouraging as well
so can you tell us a little bit about
your upbringing
sure i uh
grew up in southern california was uh
involved in high school sports and in
band
uh went to college in southern
california
and then i was on a rotc scholarship
wow and so graduating from college then
i went right into the air force
i was commissioned within the air force
i had a variety of space operations
jobs and system acquisition for space
systems
and then uh spent 27 years in the air
force retired
13 years ago been working for a defense
contractor
ever since uh married my wife when i was
a little more senior
36 year old 36 years old and
um she had uh one son
from a prior marriage and then we had
zach and carson
and we've been married 27 years wow
so hey can i ask you a couple questions
they may be a little bit personal you're
allowed to not answer them
sure um i i appreciate the hesitation
with your answer there
but so let me ask you something like uh
you know
what about her what like so i think
about a 36 year old guy
who's unmarried and so i i sometimes
think that it takes a special kind of
woman
to you know get you to settle down
can you tell us a little bit about what
your experience with meeting your wife
was like and how you guys decided to get
married
sure um you're right she's a special
woman
i married up
and uh we had
i think a lot in common in uh
the career field we were in i was in the
air force she was a civilian
defense contract or excuse me a defense
employee
uh we had the same ambitions for his
family
uh same likes and dislikes in the way of
hobbies and sports and we kind of had
the same drive
too i think we're kind of wired similar
as i mentioned before we
we face challenges head on and we like
working challenges
and uh and being fulfilled with
success and the outcome of uh of
challenges
and uh we had just a lot in common
and uh we can communicate we could talk
she was
she's was my best friend then and she
still is
you say you're wired similarly um
you mean like in what way what about
y'all is similar in terms of your wiring
or drive um
follow through to completion
i'll say service
serving others so that they are
satisfied which
is sometimes challenging obviously but
um
concerned about always meeting the needs
of others
in our in our careers even what she does
now
she's an interior designer uh always uh
wanting to satisfy the customer the
client
sounds like she really puts other people
ahead of herself
yes definitely you sound like you value
her a lot
oh yeah
yeah like that she's she's my best
friend so i can lean on her with
anything
does she lean on you yes
um emotionally and she can come talk to
me
uh physically she's out helping me with
projects working on the house
um essentially any other project
we do things together and uh we're a
good team
and uh she has talents like in
communication she's better at
communicating than i am you know i'm
i'm an engineer engineers typically
don't know how to communicate very well
and i'm a good example of that
and she's uh very complimentary in that
realm when
if i have to write something or have to
uh articulate something she's very good
at helping in crafting
the right choices of words
you know oddly enough dave i don't know
that i would agree with you that
engineers are not good at communicating
nor would i call you a not good
communicator
um can i tell you what i see
sure i don't see a problem with
communication i see
a lack of vocabulary
fair fair assessment i i don't think
it's an issue of talent i think it's an
issue of
experience you know i think you're i
think if we gave you the words
you'd be able to use them very very well
i think you're just somewhat unfamiliar
with the words
because i think you're somewhat
unfamiliar with your internal
environment
which is a little bit judgmental to say
but i'm just you know you've been very
authentic with me and i hope it's okay
that i'd be transparent with you
and i'll explain what i mean by that
what do you think about that
you're right uh english and
communication has not been my strong
suit
nor a big interest
when it came to academics or school and
it has been
one of the weaker talents of mine
or skill sets i preferred more the math
technical side sure that's where that's
what i enjoy
uh never have been one that really
enjoys writing novels or
stories or or anything like that so my
wife is a little more talented in that
that realm and then so we balance each
other out
yeah so so if i can offer something kind
of relating to that so i think it's
interesting because
understanding the self in the west
has become related to like poetry
right it's like understanding the self
and understanding emotions is like
therapy and poetry and it's all these
like nebulous
like not really based in any real system
kind of things does that make sense
i mean i i say this as a psychiatrist
like i've just noticed this
so there's an interesting study that was
done that if you look at couples
counseling
men actually are reluctant to engage in
couples counseling
because they feel disadvantaged because
it's a territory that they don't know
how to play that game
what do you think about that
i don't know hadn't thought of that
before
yeah it's kind of interesting didn't
know it was studying like that
yeah it would you feel
uncomfortable doing something like
family counseling or couples counseling
no why not
because there's value in it
in making the family life better
okay so i completely agree that you
would be willing to do it and that you
would be gung-ho
what i'm asking you is would you feel
uncomfortable
sure right so like this is i think
something dave that i would really
encourage you to tunnel down and and
because i noticed that
you can feel a particular way and you're
very good at actually mastering your
feelings
but just because you can control your
discomfort or compensate for it
doesn't mean that the discomfort isn't
there
does that make sense yeah do you think
there's
value in understanding that the
discomfort is there and where it comes
from
yes why
in order to you have to understand the
root
of that discomfort before you can do any
sort of
correction okay
so can we play with live ammo
with that principle can i ask you a
question that may be a little bit
evoke some emotion
sure are you feeling uncomfortable
as i already up what are the questions
gonna be
i know right so so let's so we're
already playing with live ammo that was
the question
that was it there's another one but so
like when i asked that question now how
do you feel close your eyes
what do you feel in your body now that i
put you on the spot
a little discomfort where
um you're getting personal
yeah there's viewers online here yep so
when someone
engages you personally what do you feel
protective and what are you protecting
uh i guess weaknesses
okay and which weaknesses are you
protecting
particular ones
i think it's that i tend to be more
private so now i'm opening the door and
revealing
more so of who i am
in inside versus what is the appearance
on the outside
okay so
we can talk about that's a topic i think
for a different day about
you know thinking about i would
encourage you to think about you know is
it okay for other people to see what's
on the inside
because i imagine that you were taught
that the answer to that question is no
i think you have your own independent
answers
but i would hypothesize that you were
conditioned to not
show people and i would also hypothesize
that that has something to do with the
way that your parents were
what do you think about that i think
it's a little both
my parents i think
were um between this themselves
were open
outside of the household they'll say not
so much they're more
private um myself
some of that some of myself
is acquired from my upbringing
and some of it is by on personal
experience
in that if i have uh
opened up um
[Music]
i've been burned so
again going back to protection
and um it's
it's a protection i guess on how much
you reveal
or what you review okay
okay and i'll say there's value in doing
that
personally for me being able to trust
someone and to communicate
uh what's what's going on inside but
then also
i think there's value if somebody can
benefit from that or benefit from my
experience
maybe however private it might be
there's value in that to help someone
else out
sure so um dave i
i want to maybe ask you just a couple
more questions and then we can get you
and zach
on together is that okay sure so
um you mentioned earlier uh and i
noticed a little bit of negative emotion
around this that you know you you guys
have come really a long way with carson
but that sometimes at the cost
of zach you use the word sacrifice
can you help me understand that a little
bit better
when carson would have his meltdowns
when he was young and
even now um obviously it's a major
distraction
an interruption
and especially if there's already
some sort of interaction with zach
and there's a rhythm going and out of
the blue you get a
interruption from carson it
unfortunately takes time away from zach
and i think that has been the case
at with him growing up that carson is
always
distracted and uh
interfered with the relationship
development with zach
it's just my observation how do you feel
about that
um it's lost time
it's lost time that can never get back
and those uh
those younger years that i i think
of from 4 to 10 somewhere there where
they start to become independent
start to develop their own character and
who they're going to be those are
precious years
they go so stinking fast
and can't get back the lost time
and uh
it hurts
what hurts about it
that i think that could have
uh jeopardize the relationship that we
maybe have today
and um
if he was in need for any kind of
emotional support he couldn't get it
because
there's a distraction going on with
carson
and there is some guilt there
and
you know missed out on that opportunity
to really bond
in those early years like that because
they're precious moments and you realize
that obviously as you get older
and you look back those are just
precious years
that you and you can't get those any
other way
only only with a a parent-child
relationship like that you can't get
that kind of uh
fulfillment any other way
and are you talking about fulfillment
for you or fulfillment for zach
both
have you guys ever talked about this
very lightly that i recall
once okay
and um
i think it's possible that
either of us really didn't know how to
introduce it or how to even
start that discussion
um thank you for sharing that i can see
that it was emotional for you it was
emotional for me too
um how do you feel about
you know do you feel okay right now can
we keep talking
sure i'm good um
so how's your relationship with zach now
sounds like a good idea i think i'm
going to hydrate too yeah
um
non non-combative not confrontational
and pretty much we only see each other
since kovid that i've been working at
home might see him in the morning
in the kitchen when i take a break and
then see them at dinner
and we converse and talk pretty much
whatever's going on in the news
and it's very brief and that's it
and most of this time is in the basement
uh in his room uh assuming
uh gaming um
and that's really the extent of it okay
how do you feel about that
again it goes back to the relationship
uh i don't
think that's healthy
we're both missing out on time
time is ticking away and it's a valuable
opportunity
that we're all in the same household
and he's back from school that we could
attempt to bond
establish a friendship
and help even as
a him part of the team helping with
carson as well
do you feel like he doesn't help with
carson
he's attempted he's tried i think
um it's a it's a bit difficult for him i
think
uh emotionally i think also he may not
fully have the tool set the skill set of
how to
work with carson because he has been
away at school
essentially for five years
and uh it's a long time yeah
and the only time you saw him was when
he came home with you know holidays and
stuff like that and so it's very brief
and
he may not fully understand how carson
works or how he ticks now and
um how do you
how do you help him and i think one way
is
try to become a friend with carson try
to
understand um
what's going on in his mind what his
frustrations are
sure so dave i'm gonna
we're gonna get zach back in here in a
minute um because we've been talking for
a little while and i think this kind of
stuff can be kind of
energy intensive and i don't know that
you've got a whole lot of excess fuel to
burn
well i'm good okay
uh but my you know is it okay if i share
a couple of thoughts with you
sure so first thing is that i i don't
think that like
this is about carson yet so i know that
carson is a huge part of y'all's life
and
and you know dominates a lot of what
y'all spend your time
working on thinking on enjoying
um and my first thought is that
that at least between you and zach the
first thing that needs to happen is that
like you all need to form a relationship
independent of anyone else in your
family
right like like if i had to sum it up
you have to make up for lost time
right and so what do you think about
that
fully agree um
it's it's a little difficult right now
because
we're not communicating
to understand where he is right now
after returning from school
um obviously he's
funding relief through gaming
um there's certainly everybody has their
own way of dealing with stress and
and relief some you know maybe physical
exercise or whatever
but uh that tends to be his relief
and um i think
we we just want to make sure that we
don't
push him too hard because we
we don't fully understand what he's
going through emotionally
and mentally and uh so it's
kind of kid gloves and trying to
understand
would like to understand the emotions
what he's going through
and what he is thinking about for the
way ahead
okay so
dave a couple of thoughts the first
thing is
you know i want to respect your privacy
especially as you've gotten burned
before so we have an option
a couple of options one is that you know
we can just get zach back in here
we can sort of kind of sum up it'll be
kind of
kid gloves i'll hear a couple of general
thoughts
and then leave the two of you to start
that discussion
or whatever kind of on your own in
private
okay um upsides of that it's safe
downsides of that you may quickly fall
into a pattern where it's hard to get
over that activation energy of having
those kinds of conversations
option two is that we can think about
starting that conversation like now
um and problems with that is that
sometimes it could get emotional
it could feel voyeuristic because people
are
watching and i don't want to pressure
you into you know anything that you
don't feel comfortable with
upside is that i think that you've
you've said a couple of things to me
today that while they're hot and fresh
in your mind would be very valuable for
zach to hear
so i leave it up to you we're gonna go
you want to have the conversation with
him now
or do you want to just have a general
kind of sum up
i would like to get his input but
uh i think option one the general sum up
and then he and i embark on
a private conversation okay can i share
with you one or two things that i think
it's important for
you to say to him sure
um at the top of the list is i think
like you shared about
lost time i think that's something that
zach needs to hear from you
good um does that make sense to you
yes what makes sense about that
he understands where i'm coming from and
and sort of the reason to try to
reestablish that relationship
i think it's even more it's run simpler
than that
i think he needs to understand that the
fact that y'all lost
time hurts you
what do you think about that
yes he he needs to understand that
and and i think this is the tricky thing
right is like i don't think
anyone would say that you did anything
wrong
and that's important for you to
understand and that's important for him
to understand
and yet this kind of goes back to like
what is the value of negativity if it
leads to like you know
it's just i think he needs to see
that you recognize that y'all were dealt
a bad hand
because eight-year-old zach
nine-year-old zack and ten-year-old zach
didn't couldn't understand that
but now he's a grown he's a grown man
and i think that he also feels the lack
of y'all's relationship
and i think the the way to really start
bridging that gap is like
to talk about what you know what what it
was like
and and i i don't know and here's the
other last thing that i'll tell you dave
is that i think you
uh do an excellent job of trying to
understand
everything outside of yourself so even
when you talk about zach and you think
about your interactions with him you say
i need to understand him better the
other thing that i would encourage you
to do
is let other people understand you
you don't always have to be the
understander
and let zach let him see who you are
because it i i it seems to me like
you've raised
two amazing sons and you can start to
lean on them
too i know it sounds weird
but you know i i think the conversation
isn't just about understanding him in a
weird way like you almost have to model
opening up because he's more likely to
open up if you open up
if somebody's got the first move
and i i don't i don't know
and here's why i think i don't know that
it should be you
but the reason that i am defaulting to
you making the first move
is because out of all of the
conversations i've had with him and you
you're the one
who i think has said the words that are
the most important to say
and that's why i think you should say
them it's not about first it's just
you have the most important thing to say
yeah thoughts questions
so the first one you mentioned was lost
time
was there a second nope that i missed
okay
i mean i think that's that's a great
place to start right and thinking about
y'all's relationship
and and what that kind of looks like and
feels like to you guys now
i think the second point for you is that
i think understanding what you're
feeling
and also communicating that to zach
could be healthy for both of you
and i think will pave the way for him to
do the same
third thing is anyway the rest we can
talk about together you feel
okay grabbing him yeah okay we'll go get
yep i know everybody wants them to talk
on stream
but that's for us right that's not for
them
so i don't doubt that that would get
clipped and shipped
but that's not what we're here for
oh all right
right can we get both the perfect okay
so zack yeah i talked to your dad for a
little bit longer than i talked to you
did you i think so not sure
um what were you concerned at all about
what we were talking about or were you
thinking about it at all
well i was talking to my mom about it
but we ended up getting sidetracked from
other discussions
okay um zach do you want to summarize
uh kind of our conversation for your dad
and then we'll have your dad kind of
summarize
what we talked about how does that sound
start
sure so go for it
oh yeah i thought you said you're okay
nope you're gonna have to
just let me think here um
uh we kind of all over the place aren't
we
we started by talking about the a
conversation that i had with mom
earlier was this was like a half a week
ago um
which was about uh like the situation
with carson
um and his autism and
how they're infecting um
stuff like a lot of times spent on
the situation with the window cleaners
and so like
how she convey to me her perspective of
that situation
and what my perspective that situation
was as well
and how like there was a whole bunch of
crazy stuff going on
you know and how carson
[Music]
was obviously difficult and whatnot but
then also how you
play into that and how mom plays into
that and how um
everyone just sort of like beats on each
other right
like carson will have his pattern and
then
you will have your set rules or whatever
that you have to follow and then mom
will try to enforce those but then
carson will fight get back against that
and then other people fight each other
and that i'm just trying to like sit on
the sidelines and not get involved and
like hype myself right
because i don't want to be part of any
of that um
what else did we talk about
i don't remember i can i can kind of
jump in
um thanks thanks for sharing that zach
so a couple of other things
uh dave that we talked about are a
little bit about y'all's
interpersonal interactions and um
zach has the impression that you're
quite organized and quite structured
and i'd actually hypothesized to zach
that maybe if you
feel uncomfortable or anxious or
stressed
that the way that you resp the way that
you manage that stress
is by import imposing order around you
because that may help you you know like
the more chaotic things become the more
you kind of double down on imposing
order and structure
um we
uh also talked a little bit about
y'all's relationship
and and zach mentioned to me that you
know he feels a little bit closer
to your wife and that they're able to
talk a little bit more freely
um and that he does want to be able to
kind of talk to you maybe
somewhat in the same way i mean i think
he acknowledges that you all are
different and that you
don't have to have the same relationship
um but that
communicating and better understanding
between the two of you is actually
really important
we spent a fair amount of time talking
about carson
um you know y'all's family situation uh
the challenges that y'all face
um and and kind of gave me a lot of
background
shared a couple of stories but i think
that basically oh the other thing
interesting thing that he said is that
he actually knows very little about like
what your life growing up was like and
and he actually doesn't know too much
about
you um and maybe he was a little bit
curious about that
sometimes uh it it seems like um
either he or your wife may feel like
they they're kind of walking on
eggshells around you
that they're afraid that they may upset
you if they say or do the wrong thing
um and i'm just sharing this stuff with
you not to kind of put you on the spot
or try to get you to defend yourself or
anything like that
i don't think it's like either or i
don't think someone is right or someone
is wrong
i'm just sharing with you what their
pers what his perception is
and how he feels
any thoughts questions responses
oh i understand uh i've heard
those comments before
and um i do remember
zach one time expressing that he didn't
know much about me or my childhood
that's fair um
yet on the other hand
for example i think the time that
actually occurred was we were sitting
around a campfire
and that would have been an opportune
time
to ask questions
try to understand what was your
childhood like
did i do growing up and the
the fun times the challenging times
and experiences sure sure so
uh it's a little bit of both i didn't
divulge to him
nor did he inquire sure so what i'm
hearing from you is that it's a two-way
street
yes absolutely that's fair
all right sure um
uh dave do you want to sum up uh or or
kind of
share what we talked about with zach
yeah it seemed to pretty quickly
head down to carson
in the center of the discussion pretty
much
and the family dynamics and uh his uh
impact on the family and
how that i think
impacted our relationship when you were
younger
somewhere around that four to ten year
period
where uh to me those are very precious
years
as you start to develop your character
and and your identity and who you're
going to be
and uh those are very precious years
in my view of establishing the
relationship
and bonding and
i sensed that carson was a distraction
during that time
where we could not
establish that relationship and do
things together
do the the boy stuff the manly stuff
and uh as a result that's
uh i think contributed to sort of the
relationship we have today where it's
not as
close as it should be
i saw you reacting
dave i thought that was going to be a
private conversation
oh the details
okay so if that's option two if we've
already opened the door
if you want to continue i mean i didn't
open any doors bro
i i was okay
no i didn't cut off i just stopped
talking okay
i just couldn't okay
so now i'm a little bit confused because
i don't know what to do um
so okay i guess we're talking about it
now
so zack um what did you hear from your
dad
i'm already blind okay
so think for a second what what did he
say sorry for derailing both y'all i was
caught off guard
yeah now i'm caught off guard um
so like first of all two-way street i
remember that
then he said that you guys started
talking about cars oh yeah
how like the the early years
are important or whatever for like
developing your identity and stuff which
is actually something that i kind of
disagree with
i think that even still now i'm kind of
struggling with my identity and whatnot
and that's something that you got your
whole life but that's a different
conversation
um yeah carson i don't know if he was
necessarily a distraction per se
um i just think that as a family we
struggled to
handle him we didn't know what we were
doing there was no guidebook how to have
an autistic child in your family and
not screw up family-week relationships
because of it right
it's gonna cause strains and it's hard
to know how to handle that and so i
think that
it wasn't it was it was just really hard
for us all to handle that we were all
spending so much time on him
that we couldn't spend time on each
other because we didn't know what we
were doing
yeah and then like i now remember when i
was talking to you how
i say that it was difficult for me to
connect with carson because
i mean again i didn't know what i was
doing um
i felt like i was just in general being
an [ __ ] to him because
so zach i'm gonna just interrupt you
yeah i apologize
so dave so i think zach
what did you hear how would you describe
what zach heard
um
[Music]
maybe missed the mark that it was lost
time
yep and he didn't miss the mark i think
you guys did what y'all do
which is you guys talk about situations
right so he understood that you were
saying that like
you know there's character development
because you don't say
you leave out y'all
y'all eat brisket oh yeah
so like you know when you slice into
brisket
and that juice is in the middle and it's
like when you get a well-cooked brisket
and it falls apart but it's like moist
and juicy
yeah you left out the juice dave
right you talk you gave him the
structure
but what you said just now is very
different from what you conveyed to me
does that make sense to you
the words are the same
right i guess i miss i understand okay
sorry
so like you talked about lost time but
when we were talking about it
what were you feeling
when you and i talked about it it was
emotional
yep and when you were telling it to zach
what were you feeling
it was emotional and
not to the extent when i was talking to
you yep
right so like zach did you get any
emotion from him
when he said that uh a little bit at the
start but knows about it
yep and i think this is what what you
all do which is normal by the way
is that like you know you're conveying
the words but i i think
um if if you're okay dave i'm gonna push
you is that okay because i mean you open
the door but we can just stop
sure so how do you feel
so first of all let's be explicit like
what do you what does lost time mean to
you
in relation to zach
those are years of
childhood that are valuable as i
mentioned
and you can never get them back and
those years
those those precious years of four to
ten roughly
when when you're a child like that
and everything's happy go lucky
um no no worries in the world
no stresses or your mind is not polluted
yet
from the environment those
years of dad and child
development can never get
get those back again okay so you talk
about dad and child
so what i'm hearing you say is that
there
are times of zack's life that because
of carson's needs you were not able to
give him
what you really wanted to yes
is that fair yeah and i'll also add in
there too
that it isn't a blame or
all on carson i was still
pursuing a career at the same time
and very demanding and so
again trying to stay balanced personally
and with the family was extremely
challenging
and uh carson was a heavy weight
on that scale and who paid the price of
that weight
we all did but uh certainly zach
i think payday price
okay zach what's it like to hear that
i don't know it's
it's so weird because like i can't
remember that much
of that period of my life right and i've
been spending so much of my time
recently speaking thinking about like
recent times and trying to like help
myself right now with the future and
whatnot
um
so it's like it's hard to wrap my head
around the perspective honestly
yeah i don't know i don't really yeah
i don't really know what i'm doing so
i'm gonna try to translate for dave
okay dave is that okay i'm gonna take
the spotlight off of you is that cool
sure so zach i think what i understood
and this is the advantage of streaming
this to the internet is now
you can go back and watch it um but
i think what i heard from your dad uh
and what i felt very palpably is that
like
like we have to be careful because it's
not about blame
but what i really felt from him was that
he actually mourns
the lack of time that
he's been he he mourns the amount of
time that he hasn't been able to give
you
and we're not saying that he acted
wrongly
we're not saying that he's to blame
we're not saying that carson's to blame
it's just the reality of y'all's
household and that's
tough right no one's to blame
and yet he really wishes that he could
have had
and i know you don't remember those
years but i have i have an almost
five-year-old so i kind of know a little
bit about what dave's talking about
and and there is something incredibly
precious and valuable
about bonding and forming a relationship
and that time just doesn't come back
and um what i i think what really
maybe what dave is trying to say is that
you know just that
that he feels hurt by not being able to
give you
in a sense what he feels like you
deserve
how's that dave good summary
hard for dave to say how does it make
you feel to hear that from me
can can you try tell it'd probably be
better if you actually do you feel
comfortable saying
something like that directly to zach
oh yeah sure i feel comfortable doing
that can you all look at each other
because it's [ __ ] i feel
i don't know what it's [ __ ] weird
apologies for the language
when i was interested
in having the family i was really
interested in bonding with a young
innocent child and growing up with that
child
and doing cool stuff together and we we
did have some moments
where we've been camping and fishing and
skied like crazy
but there were always
distractions distractions of carson is
one
and certainly a distraction to the
stress of my my job and
what i was pursuing in a career and
it was a distraction to me mentally and
it didn't allow us i think to fully
develop
a relationship when you're younger that
could continue on
in your adult life and particularly now
when you like you mentioned trying to
understand your identity now
that i could be there along with your
mom
and uh help you through the the trial
you're going through now
is you can't explain it you can only
experience it but being a parent
it's a real tough balancing act
when you're trying to be a provider
emotionally
financially um and to provide for your
family
pursue a career have time to spend with
your wife
and spend time with your kids and yet
have
some alone time to do things you like to
do if you want to go to the gym or go
run or whatever but try to balance
all these demands in life and then
you have a special needs child thrown
into the equation
makes it even more difficult there's no
manual there's no training
to help young parents
manage a family like that and uh
that's one thing i think lacking in our
society and our school system
is how do you have
a functional family
how do you teach kids to raise kids
become parents and how to balance
their life and to be
successful with a parent parenting
we don't teach that in school and
there's no manual that comes with each
kid because every kid is unique
wired completely different and
we learned by the seat of our pants or
by our parents or by our
friends
zach what was that like to listen to
uh i don't know
it was emotional parts right um
so your dad did something where he went
underwater
felt those emotions and then suddenly
now we're talking about
how people need a manual for child race
rearing
yeah and so dave i think your mind does
something where
when you feel emotions the engineering
brain turns on and you start talking
about abstract problem-solving kinds of
things because it's hard for you to just
hit the pause button when you're
conveying
to zach how you feel which is okay
right so that's a skill that you'll need
to learn it may be
sort of an excuse is in that
um i did the best i could yep there's no
daniel to tell me
you know how to raise him or how to
spend time with
enjoying them and so uh
it's just trying to articulate that
every kid is unique and how you raise
them or how you
establish relationships is they're all
different
okay yeah i think it's everything you
said is spot on man
um zach you look like you're kind of
processing
anything that you want to share with
your dad i mean you don't have to share
anything by the way
and dave you were supposed to have this
conversation in private but i'm sort of
glad you had it in public because i
don't i don't know if
you would have come across the right way
yeah
you don't have to say anything if you
want to just process
i mean the only thought that's coming to
mind is that like
yeah it
you generally do not get emotional
practice
and a lot of like
that's an observation not a blame dave
yeah
yeah a lot of communication becomes
easier when you're able to
convey those things like when i was able
to
connect with mom really well when she
was able to explain how she felt
to me and i think that part of why
i've been able to get close to her is
more so is because of that right like
our relationship has always been about
i don't know how to explain it like
things right like it's
it's been we're gonna go skiing and
we're gonna go ride atvs or
we're gonna work on this thing together
or teaching it's been
so much more like
i guess literal i don't know how to
explain it or if there's words for that
but
yeah i understand that emotional
connection has
never really been there um it's yeah
and i i don't even yeah i'm just sort of
like spilling thoughts right i'm not
going somewhere i'm gonna jump in so
dave
i think you've got to be careful because
you can feel blame
when he says something like that do you
feel blame
it i'll say yes but i understand
where he's coming from because yeah so
this once again is about
you can feel blame but not be at fault
yeah right that's that's a big lesson
here is that what you feel on the inside
so so here's what i'm gonna say to y'all
okay and now we're gonna kind of wrap up
if that's okay with you guys any
questions so okay so the first thing
is that um zach
so dave when you think about those
formative years of four to ten
i think you lucked out because what zack
is telling you is that his formative
years aren't over yet
and he still needs your help so i think
sure you miss four to ten but he's as
old as he is now and he's asking for you
to help him figure that out
and he's saying that you know it's not
too late and that it's important that
even if you guys have had trouble
you guys have always focused on things
that like now is your chance
um is that fair zach
yeah let's see that's here the last
thing
that i'll just say is covet is a can i
are you all okay with bad language
okay so then i'll avoid it sorry um
you know i'm i grew up in a culture of
moral decay dave
so my my language is loose but
but covet is a mess and and it really
puts a lot of pressures on on families
and i i really hope that um
you know i think family counseling is is
gonna be important for you guys but the
most important thing that i would say is
that both of you guys want the same
thing
which is a deeper relationship and a
better understanding with each other
and it's going to be hard and it's going
to be confusing and all kinds of stuff
is going to come up
as you guys walk this journey but as
long as you guys walk it together
and you all lean on each other y'all are
going to be fine
any last thoughts or questions
i'll say one thing is
and we need to understand zach
better yep and that's one thing
as he matured and entered adulthood
his interests became different than
than mine so
that was one area where we started to
or he became more um isolated i guess
from the family and his interests were
different for example gaming
you know yeah i've done some xbox games
a few times big deal
uh i don't understand his perspective on
gaming
and the attraction with it and
satisfaction fulfillment with it
and that's just one example of our
differences
understanding those and appreciating
those and respecting each other
with those different interests but yet
how can we find something in common
and have that relationship with those
differences
sure so i i think these are ongoing
conversations
and i think at the end of the day
david's you know my
my first instinct in response to that
would be that you know it is important
for you to understand gaming i think
that's a really important discussion
um for actually i think it's the most
important discussion for our particular
community
because parents don't understand and we
don't do a good job as kids
explaining it to our parents and it's a
two-way street
yeah i i would say at the end of the day
though understanding
i think zach wants to understand you
better as well
and it's not so much about interest and
stuff i i think sharing some of what you
did today and i i know zack has been
working through a lot of stuff and and
zach hopefully you know you can you feel
comfortable enough to convey some of the
things that you're thinking through with
your parents and
and what your motivations and thoughts
are around some of that stuff
um but i think just keep communicating
and hopefully all will get there
thoughts on family counseling thing i
think you all should do family
counseling
okay i i think it's nice to have someone
to facilitate communication because it's
hard
right like like it's hard because i
think your dad had something really
really important to say
and it took him a couple of tries to be
able to say it in a way that you could
hear
so it's not just like he has to say it
the right way it's like
about the way that you're you're you
hear things too
and so sometimes you'll need a little
bit of a nudge until you learn how to do
it on your own
sound good take care
thank you you do strong work really
strong work today
adios
okay damn